reading has left a massive impact in my
life and it can for you too and in this
episode I'm going to tell you some of
the major life lessons I've learned from
reading books and I'm going to help you
determine which books might be best for
you as well let's get into it
[Music]
here is what I've learned from reading
an obscene amount of self-improvement
books number one you have a lot
a lot of really dumb beliefs that you
have mistaken for objective truth
everybody gets trapped inside their own
minds nobody more so than me and because
we all get trapped inside of our own
minds if you really want to make change
in your life the first thing you're
going to have to do is recognize what
those beliefs are unwind them and then
you can begin to layer the new beliefs
in and that's the second thing is you
need to build up a set of beliefs that's
going to take you where you want to go
now we live in what many people refer to
as a post truth World well I'm here to
tell you boys and girls that the truth
is going to slap you about the head neck
and chest as much as you would like to
avoid it or hope pray pretend that it
isn't real we are all beholden to the
way the world works and the world Works
in some kind of way and we all filter
everything through our brain and that is
the third thing that you are having a
biological experience there is a reality
to be faced so let me thread the needle
between these two things so you're going
to be building up this set of beliefs
and you're going to be doing it
in a way that recognizes the truth of
the way that the world is including your
own biology so what do I mean by you
have to layer on beliefs so you have all
these false beliefs that you're
mistaking as reality
you're going to recognize those you're
going to begin unwinding them now you're
going to figure out what the truth is
the truth very simply is that which most
efficiently moves you towards your goals
now what do I mean by that
so if you think in the beginning there
was Newtonian physics and that helped
everybody understand how the planets
were revolving around the Sun it helped
describe the motion of large bodies as
they say but then Einstein came around
and even though Newtonian physics opened
up the world and answered a lot of
questions and moved us a step closer to
the truth and at that time you could
have said hey Newtonian physics are the
truth and you would have been
effectively right it was the most
effective thing that we had to move us
forward now instead of it being a
post-truth world when we realize oh
actually Einstein has a version that
allows us to even more efficiently move
towards our goals so for instance we
could not have had GPS with Newtonian
physics it wasn't until we had
relativity in special relativity that we
were able to get so precise that we
could nail down someone's position at
speed to within a couple of feet so it
required us to get even better better at
predicting the outcome of our actions
and so when people ask me what the truth
is what I tell them is whatever belief
allows you to most accurately predict
the outcome of your actions now that
doesn't mean that you're making it up it
means your ability to predict the
outcome of your actions is tied to what
is real so the reason that you're more
able to predict the outcome of your
actions when you understand in the case
of physics Einstein's general relativity
and special relativity is because it
gives you a higher degree of accuracy so
it isn't that Newtonian physics were
wrong they were directionally correct
it's just that we're always refining now
as most physicists will tell you
there's actually something Beyond
einsteinian physics I think that's how
you would say that and that is what they
call the theory of everything so there's
a gap between
relativity and special relativity and
quantum physics and nobody quite knows
what that thing is it's going to bridge
all of that together so even though
we're not all the way the
progress that we've made from Newton
from like uh the Bible tells us
everything that is true to Newtonian
physics and then to relativity and
special relativity and now there's going
to be something even beyond that and
each time that we get closer to the
truth we're able to predict more and
more things that's how you need to think
about unwinding the poor beliefs that
you have which are moving you away from
your goals because they do not give you
a frame of reference with which you can
most accurately predict the outcome of
your behaviors and your actions and so
you're trying to then strip those away
get to the ones that more efficiently
move you towards your goals and again
the only reason that you're going to be
moving more efficiently towards your
goals is because that belief is more
accurately aligned to the way the world
actually works including your own
biology and your brain and the way that
you distort and interpret the world your
brain unfortunately is not designed to
give you an accurate representation of
the world your brain is designed to keep
you alive long enough to have kids that
have kids
and the difference between
what evolution thought would be most
useful to keep you alive long enough to
have kids that have kids and what
actually is most useful in a modern
context there is a gap and that Gap
leads to things like obesity
diabetes Alzheimer's all that kinds of
stuff because all of our impulses lead
us to behave in a way that made sense
when food for instance was hyper scarce
but now that that food is not hyper
scarce we find ourselves in a position
where we're just constantly overeating
and people get themselves in trouble so
once you begin to realize oh wait a
second just following the impulse to eat
is not a useful way to determine whether
I should consume something or not so I'm
going to refine my beliefs around that
that sometimes I'm actually going to
ignore hunger or I'm going to get a
better understanding of macronutrients
and how they act as signaling molecules
and so in the case of diet this is a bit
like going from not knowing anything to
Newtonian physics right then to getting
all the way to like the really fancy
stuff where uh we're able to use food
science to do things like a fasting
mimicking diet so on and so forth so
just to re-anchor us you start with all
of these beliefs that are cobbled
together through run-ins with your
family and what they believe to be true
run-ins with uh failure in life
embarrassment your friends pop culture
all of that stuff and that steers you to
want things to think of the world in a
certain way to love certain things about
yourself to hate certain things about
yourself all of that which is creating
this jumbled mess in your mind of how
things should be
which is further Complicated by the
biology of having a brain that was
created slowly and blindly over millions
of years of evolution and
as you begin to understand things like
and this is not this again is a partial
truth but it will get you directionally
in the right direction that the brain is
comprised of three layers again only
directionally accurate and you have what
they call the lizard brain at the center
all Instinct all the time then you've
got the mammalian brain all emotion all
the time and then the outer layer you
have the
um human brain we'll call it which is
the
um the part that is able to process
higher level cognition and so when you
understand that you have a brain
directionally that's made of those three
layers
then you can begin to realize oh so I
don't just need to just like I'm not
going to use hunger as the determining
Factor as to whether or not I eat I'm
going to have a more nuanced
understanding of my biology and why I
might feel hungry even when I don't need
calories I'm not just going to listen to
my emotions I'm going to realize that my
brain works in some kind of way and I
need to layer in a belief system about
how the brain works that allows me to
more accurately predict the outcome of
my actions so instead of just being
emotional which is going to lead me to a
sub-optimal
pattern of behavior where people get
angry at times where building a bridge
would be a more appropriate response or
even just calming yourself down or they
are fearful in the face of an
opportunity take speaking in public for
example much of my
um success at impact theory has been
built to my ability to speak in front of
a camera or in front of a live audience
but nonetheless I had all kinds of fear
especially in the beginning of doing
that and so recognizing oh that fear was
meant to keep me alive when I was a part
of a hunter-gatherer band of people and
I had to be very careful about pissing
off uh anybody that was in charge and I
could find myself isolated and so I had
to fight through that emotional layer to
get to a cognitive logical layer that
allowed me to come up with a belief that
it was okay if I failed it was okay if I
risked things and embarrass myself it's
even okay if I get pushed out of one
group I can always find another right in
a modern context all of that makes a lot
more sense and so as we refine our
thinking and build this new set of
beliefs we can actually get closer again
to predicting more accurately the
outcome of our behaviors now there's an
amazing Economist that I encourage you
all to look into a man named Thomas soul
and he sums up this idea that I'm trying
to get across here in self-development
which is all about the quote is let me
give it to you this is a paraphrase was
very very close to exact
the last 30 years have been marked by
exchanging what worked for what sounds
good
in your life that's the goal you want to
exchange what sounds good what seems
like it should be right for what
actually yields the results that you're
looking for and that becomes the
barometer where you can judge is what I
believe true or not so for instance if I
have a belief that says hey I should
follow my emotions wherever they lead
everything happens for a reason after
all so I have this emotion for a reason
I should act on this emotion I do that I
alienate people and I'm not able to
build my company okay well that's a
problem because my goal requires that I
build this company so what am I going to
do with my set of beliefs well I ran
that experiment by believing and let's
just say that's how I was raised that if
you have an emotion it happens for a
reason and you should live your
authentic life and enact that emotion
cool I try that I'm not able to keep a
group of people around me I'm not able
to build a team I'm not able to keep
myself or other people focused I'm not
able to stay on task or get people
excited and therefore my company just
never goes the way that I want to go
okay well I the prediction of my
behavior was that I would be able to
step closer to my goals that I would be
able to get people around me Galvanize
them because I was so authentic that
people are going to stay and move
forward cool tried that it doesn't work
so now how do I try that next thing that
next thing is going to be let's get some
emotional control I get my emotional
control whoa now instead of believing
that everything happens for a reason
that that emotion is somehow the
authentic way that I should be living I
realize nope I have this tri-layered
brain it's going to cough up emotions
that aren't necessarily going to help me
I need to rely on that third layer of
brain be more logical figure out what it
is it's going to move myself forward
again towards my goals and then try that
so what if instead of enacting my
emotions I figure out what is the thing
that I need to to do to get people
excited to work with me to how do I most
clearly articulate how we're going to
move forward together does emotion help
me in that does it not sometimes it does
by the way and sometimes it doesn't and
so when you are focused entirely on
stripping away beliefs that don't work
instituting beliefs that do work
recognizing that you're fighting against
your
evolutionarily derived brain
and that you can then refine your belief
system through this experimentation
process of trying things seeing the
feedback that you get adjusting the
knobs until you're actually living in
accordance with the way the world really
is and now you're able to make progress
that really is self-development that's
why you're going to hear people say that
progress is a foundational pillar of
human happiness which comes from Tony
Robbins which I think is absolutely
brilliant you're going to hear people
talking about Maslow's hierarchy of
needs that's all about understanding the
way that the brain works and trying to
help you get to fulfillment you're going
to hear people talk about fulfillment
and that's all about understanding the
result that you get in your brain from a
neurochemical standpoint when you get
that belief system in alignment so that
you're able to predict the outcome of
your behaviors when you can do that now
you can begin to shape your world into
the thing that you want now you can
begin to recognize that all of us
are having to necessarily adhere to the
formula of empowerment as I lay it out
which is me just doing my best to
understand what Nature has given us from
an evolutionary standpoint which is that
you must work really hard in order to
turn your potential into skill set so
that you can do something that you love
that gives you more energy than it takes
that allows you to serve not only
yourself but other people that is
fulfillment that's how we get there and
that
is what I've learned from reading a
gazillion books
on self-improvement
may it serve you as well as it has
served me
let me tell you right now that there are
few things more important to your
success than reading now when I say
reading I mean reading watching YouTube
videos listening to podcasts uh and by
the way when I also say reading I almost
never and I'm talking less than two
percent of the things that I read in my
life are actually read by running my
eyes across words on a page I do almost
everything in an auditory fashion so I'm
doing audio books on Audible uh using
speechify to read PDFs all of that you
can even now get speechified to read web
pages for you so I find that it's far
easier for me to get in a lot of time
reading I read about two hours a day on
average
365 days a year
and the way that I'm able to do that is
I'm reading in all of my transitional
moments if I'm brushing my teeth if I'm
moving around the house if I'm lifting
weights working out whatever I am
reading the entire time again reading
YouTube videos podcasts documents
whatever so it's critically important to
do all of that because the whole point
of
the way the human psyche and brain is
designed is for us to leverage culture
in order to
develop ourselves so if you look at
every other species
they all have to make a choice between
hard wiring everything so you're doing
everything instinctually or learning
from your parents from the culture
around you
as you go up the food chain the more
flexible the cognition is of the animal
the more likely they are to be thriving
obviously humans are the ultimate apex
predator it's a cool way to think about
it from my perspective but certainly we
are the most successful species I think
even by certainly by biomass
I don't know if it's by number but
definitely by biomass humans are the
most successful creature on planet Earth
we uh outperform ants and other insects
which may have more numbers than us but
certainly we reign supreme in a lot of
different ways and the reason is that we
are the most able to flexibly organize
ourselves so you can get ants that can
organize themselves or bees that can
organize themselves in huge groups but
they can't do it flexibly so we can come
together and do this there are multiple
people in the room right now as we're
filming this that do different aspects
of this certainly the company even more
so cities states countries this is all
people organizing themselves but we can
come together for a show we can come
together for government uh the number of
people that would be required to publish
a book the people that are uh cutting
the trees down developing the paper or
developing the ink or an e-reader the
number of people that would have to come
together to create the the physical
little item the software all of that so
humans can come together in very
flexible ways they can be in multiple
groups throughout a single day in their
life so
the whole point the very thing that
makes the human species that successful
is our ability to learn from a cultural
standpoint now the ultimate way to do
that is to find some medium where we can
transpose knowledge across time and
space and books were that first
Revolution well I guess first there were
story so what you could say orally not
nearly as effective as being able to put
things down in print so you've got the
Gutenberg Revolution as a printing press
comes online then you've got the next
major one which is the internet and
there will of course be more beyond that
AI is massive I think web 3 is going to
be massive so there are these
technological moments that allow this
information to go far and wide and right
now if you really want to get
information in rapidly you're going to
be reading books watching YouTube
listening to podcasts it is massive so
the whole point is is to be able to
transform your potential into skill set
and so I want everybody to understand
why this is so important you don't read
a book to check a box you don't read a
book to impress your parents you don't
buy a book to have it sitting on your
shelf to impress people you read a book
to get good at something to get so good
that people can't stop you I really want
people to understand this I'm going to
crawl through the screen
skills have utility they let you do
things that other people can't do they
let you beat things they let you out
compete they let you grow they let you
push yourself they let you get to the
point where you cannot be stopped no
matter how much people might hate you
you can get so good at something that
even if they want you to fail even if
they're willing to go after you and
systematically try to destroy your
ability to succeed they can't because
you can outperform
as the legend
may he rest in peace Kobe Bryant said
booze
b-o-o-s booze don't block dunks
booze don't block dunks
Kobe practiced so much
so relentlessly
so unceasingly so much more than
everyone else that he was able to
compound his natural gifts and turn
himself into an Unstoppable scoring
machine think about this
the greatest Scouts in the world were
paid a lot of money to scour the world
the entire world to find the best
players on the planet
and then those best players on the
planet were given the best coaches on
the planet paid a ton of money with the
sole intention
of stopping Kobe Bryant from scoring on
the basketball court and yet despite all
of that
he scored 81 points in a single game
that's why I read
because you can get so good at something
given the way that the human mind is
structured you will learn from that
those things that you learn will become
capabilities those capabilities will
allow you to do things that other people
can't do and whether it's build a
company be a better parent be a better
teacher whatever it is you're trying to
do
you can get extraordinarily good at that
thing now I don't believe
that I mean it's just mathematically
obvious the vast majority of us the vast
ass vast majority of us are never going
to become the greatest of all time the
truth is hitting your career goals is
not easy you have to be willing to go
the extra mile to stand out and do hard
things better than anybody else but
there are 10 steps I want to take you
through that will 100x your efficiency
so you can crush your goals and get back
more time into your day you'll not only
get control of your time you'll learn
how to use that momentum to take on your
next big goal to help you do this I've
created a list of the 10 most impactful
things that any High achiever needs to
dominate and you can download it for
free by clicking the link in today's
description alright my friend back to
today's episode
what I want you to focus on is the
reality that you can get a hundred times
better
and if I'm right and you can get 100
times better at anything and you may
have a worse starting point than
somebody else it's just a reality it's
the way the
the talent pool goes boys and girls
genetics are a lottery but only 50 of
your outcome seems to be and this is
science so you can look it up type in to
um Professor Google
what amount is what amount of success is
tied to genetics and what is tied to
effort maybe it's the right way to look
at it and every time I've looked that up
every research paper I've looked at says
it's roughly 50 50. so 50 is the hand
that you're dealt and 50 is the effort
that you put in so when I say that you
can get 100 times better I'm I'm talking
about the 50 of effort so you may start
at a deficit I am God awful at
basketball in a way that you can't
imagine one of the most embarrassing
moments of my life happened on a
basketball court and I just I'm terrible
at it for whatever reason so me a
hundred times better at basketball I am
still not going to be probably not even
going to be a star high school player
but I'm certainly not going to be a
Collegiate player uh and I'm definitely
not going to be in the NBA but I can get
100 times better than I am now and if
you think about any aspect of your life
being a hundred times better making a
hundred times more money being 100 times
more effective in your relationship
being 100 times better parent being a
hundred times better lover whatever it
is you're trying to do getting 100 times
better is radically transformative and
certainly that idea took me from
scrounging in my couch cushions to find
enough change to put gas in my car to
building a billion dollar company
that's learning
reading books is about learning
reading books is about turning your
potential into actual usable skill set
and turning your potential into actual
usable skill set is about the
recognition that booze don't block dunks
I'm sure you've all heard a lot
about how the world is against many of
you
[__] that noise
even if it's true and let's just say
that it is the world is out to get you
the world wants you to fail the world is
going to do everything it can to bring
you to your knees
what are your options
give up
give in
pursue politics
which a lot of people do
or
you can make yourself so good
that people can't stop you
if I may
offer
my advice
get so good that people can't stop you
because you cannot control other people
who the [__] knows what they're going to
do how they're going to try to trip you
up
but man oh man if you get a hundred
times better than you are now at
anything that matters
you are so much better off and that you
can control you can control how many
books you read you can control how much
of what you learn you put into practice
you can control
your effort
and since
it's what I call the only belief that
matters since
when you put energy and effort into
something you're getting better at
something you will actually get better
that's the juice
read boys and girls read as much as you
can as fast as you can in the areas that
are as important to you as humanly
possible
and then put it to use
if you do that
you can have any life you want
get after it if you want to be wealthy
successful you want to make all of your
dreams come true
there are a couple of foundational
topics that you should be researching
number one is mindset you've got to get
control of your mind the thing that
you're going to battle with the most in
life I promise is your own mind it's
your own mind your mind is going to [__]
with you and the reason that it's going
to relentlessly toy with you is its job
is not to make you wealthy and
successful its job is to keep you alive
long enough to have kids that have kids
that's just it you have to understand
the nature of things boys and girls
understand the nature of things that's
the second Point understand the nature
of things if you want to get wealthy
what is the nature of that you have to
add value to the world you have to add
so much value that people would rather
have that thing that you've created than
they want their money and you have to
get a lot of people at scale to believe
that if you do that if you add value to
the world there will always be room for
you read the book by Booker T Washington
Up From Slavery it is [__] incredible
this man was born in to slavery he
and became extraordinarily successful
what was his punch line get so good at
something that the world values that
there's always a place for you
there's just no better advice than that
go after it
figure out how your brain works
understand that you're going to be going
up against that over and over and over
figure out how to get good at something
so that you can add a tremendous amount
of value to the world
and make sure that you're understanding
the nature of things when you understand
the nature of improvement oh Improvement
is about having the energy to stick with
something long enough to get through the
boring [__] that is skill acquisition
because if you really want to acquire
Elite level skills to get a hundred
times better you are going to have to
practice things over and over and over
and over and over and over and over and
over and over with massive amounts of
intention in order to actually get good
at that thing to hardwire it in your
brain to go through a process called
myelination so that it actually gets
easier to do that thing that's why the
more you repeat something the easier it
becomes to do it and if you're repeating
something well so that you are putting
disciplined practice into something you
will improve at that thing it will
actually get wired into your brain you
will be able to do it better and more
efficiently and you'll be able to make
the kind of progress that you want to
make but that requires that you
understand the nature of practice so
that you can get through boredom it also
requires you to understand the nature of
passion it's an energy Loop between you
and other people so humans
are both the shout
and the echo
we are the shout the thing you do and
the echo the way that people respond
passion is when you get so good at
something that when you do that thing so
good at something people value
that when you do that thing the echo
back from people is oh my god do that
more that was amazing that's going to
make you feel some kind of way and it's
going to feel really [__] good and
when you get that feeling and it feels
really good you're going to want to do
more of it and so you lean in even
farther and you push yourself to get
even better and so you get an even
bigger response from people which makes
you want to go even harder which makes
you get even better which gets you a
bigger response from people which makes
you want to go even harder see how you
get into that Loop
and so now all of a sudden the reason
people tell you to follow your passion
is because you're going to have the
energy to fight through the boredom in
order to actually get good at something
so that you can get in this ever
increasing feedback loop
understand the nature of it
don't stop at the bumper sticker Follow
Your Passion that's the bumper sticker
why
why Follow Your Passion what's the point
the point is to get in that energetic
Loop
where you shout you get the echo that
gives you the energy to keep going which
allows you to push to the boredom of
repetition which allows your brain to
myelinate which is literally a fatty
tissue being wrapped around the
connection points between the neurons in
your brain which allow the signal to
travel more efficiently
that's the nature of getting good at
something now when you understand the
nature of it
you don't also get beaten to death by
confusion because that's one of the
things that stops people
is they don't know if putting the energy
and the effort into that thing is
actually going to yield results and when
you don't know that you don't have what
I call the only belief that matters that
if I put time and energy into getting
better at this thing I'll actually get
better at this thing
so
if you want to be wealthy and successful
know thyself
know thyself figure out what you're
about figure out how the brain works
understand the nature of things now once
you get that foundational nature of
things then you can begin to layer on
the specifics of what you want to do
very specifically and that is going to
be different for everybody it is very
different to want to be a tennis player
than to want to be a swimmer both sports
but still wildly different in terms of
the thing you're going to practice in
terms of the thing you're going to
repeat in terms of the thing you're
going to myelinate getting really good
at swimming only to enter the US Open
maketh no sense so
get that Foundation a layer understand
yourself get control of your emotions
know how the brain works understand how
to deliver value to the world
understand the nature of things
then pursue them doggedly
then watch yourself improve then you're
going to be able to add the value to the
world such as the nature of wealth that
you're able to get the money that you
want and the same with success success
demands that you outperform other people
it's that simple how do you win the
Super Bowl by playing better football
how do you win the World Cup by playing
better football huh huh no
so you have to get better at the thing
that you want to get better at that's
just the way that it works so
that's it know thyself know the nature
do the work
add value
get the results
that's it if you really want to get good
at something you are going to have to
get deeply efficient so if you want to
be taking in knowledge faster in your
books the easiest way is to speed it up
so part of the reason that I take in
information orally
a u r a l through the ears is that I can
speed it up so Audible for instance
allows you to go since I cap out at 3x I
don't know how much higher it goes but
it goes even higher than 3x
and that allows me to intake information
a lot faster when I'm reading a book
YouTube will allow you to go to 2x if
you're watching anything on YouTube
slower than 2x you are missing a trick
speed things up and look in the
beginning it you won't be able to do it
you're not going to be able to LEAP
straight to 2x or 3x in a book and by
the way the reason I read books at 3x
sum by the way I will slow some books
down if the information is really dense
or really complex so don't be
embarrassed but you do want to be
pushing yourself find out where your
limit is because retention matters more
than speed but I find that you can
really push your intake when you're
taking it in by listening so you're
going to start at let's say 1X push to
1.25 when that feels normal push to 1.5
and that feels normal 1.75 so on and so
forth do not settle until you get to the
point where no matter how much you
listen to it it's just not coming in and
you need to then back off a step or two
back down
that is critical to being able to
um exponentially
increase the rate at which you're able
to take in information the other thing
that you're going to want to do is read
in swarms so what I find is people slow
themselves down because they're trying
to take meticulous notes and they never
get the gist so in the beginning I'm
reading for the gist what's the gist
here give me the idea of what's
happening and then I'm going to read
three four five six books on the subject
I'm going to follow people on YouTube
that are talking about this thing and
I'm going to begin to get a rough idea
of the whole thing different angles
different voices how are multiple people
approaching this topic that's really
important and depending on what the
topic is you may also want to get want
to get into disconfirming evidence but
that doesn't have anything to do with
speed so we'll leave that outside of
this for now so you're taking in
information you're taking it in as fast
as you can actually hold on to the
information you're pushing yourself to
get faster you're just trying to get the
gist in the beginning understand who the
players are understand what the terms
are what the big concepts are reading
and warms multiple books listening to
multiple people on YouTube podcasts
whatever so now you've got like a rough
idea of what the whole shebang is then
we're going to pick is there an area
where we really want to get deep
expertise then we're going to start
drilling in then we might slow down then
we might start taking notes or probably
even more importantly this is what I do
I read as a gist then I force myself to
talk about it with other people said I
have to articulate the ideas in fact
even right now as I'm recording this
episode I'm actually concretizing the
ideas that have been sort of floating
around in my own mind I'm making them
far more concrete by explaining them to
other people so you want to get to the
point where you can explain things to
other people in a very simplistic
fashion as Einstein said if you can't
explain it simply chances are that you
just don't understand it very well so
you want to be able to un understand
things so well that you can explain them
in a very simple fashion so we're
reading in that swarm we're taking the
time to explain it to other people
things that aren't quite sinking in
we're going to take time to journal out
figure out what is it that I'm missing
here try to explain it to yourself in
fact that's a really good stage if
you're not comfortable speaking in front
of other people if you're worried about
looking stupid which I would highly
encourage you to abandon immediately do
not worry about looking stupid you can
always get smarter over time you can
always refine your thinking just because
you said something out loud one time
does not mean that's what you have to
believe for the rest of your life Only
Fools allow themselves to get put into
that trap constantly be refining your
thinking if I go back and watch a video
from five years ago odds are I'm going
to be embarrassed by the way that I was
thinking about things because I push my
thinking I've exposed myself to more
knowledge I'm getting as much data
disconfirming evidence as I can
sharpening it up going back to an
earlier question that I answered
I am constantly asking myself does this
piece of information allow me to more
accurately predict the outcome of my
actions yes or no if yes then odds are
it is a more true thing than whatever I
was believing previously
okay so that's what we're doing we're
reading in swarms we're getting the gist
we're going deep where we want we're
explaining things to ourselves if we're
worried about talking to other people
we're explaining things to other people
once we get comfortable to get there
we're making that more Concrete in our
own minds and then we're going to be
looking for areas of overlap so how does
this thing that I learned about World
War II apply to what's happening right
now right things like that it is freaky
in fact man I know this is off the
subject a little bit but guys
read a lot of different topics it is
startling how things in one area that
you would never think would connect over
here end up connecting and I am almost
certain that this is factually true and
not just apocryphal
but I believe that Nobel prizes are most
frequently won by people at an
intersection of two Fields so biology
and chemistry physics and chemistry
whatever the case may be an intersection
of two Fields because that's where
really unique things happen and the only
way that you're going to be able to do
that is by having broad knowledge now
that doesn't mean that you just want to
be a dilettante to cross a gazillion
things you definitely want to
go deep in certain areas but man you
want to have a handful of those areas if
you've gone pretty deep into you don't
want to isolate yourself
to just one thing now if you're trying
to get really successful the more you
can hyper focus on one thing so there I
recognize the flirtation with
contradiction that I'm making here so
you're gonna have one thing that you're
certainly going more deep than others
but you're actually going to get better
at going deep on that thing if you've
got other areas that you've got some
pretty impressive knowledge in it really
really will help okay that's how you do
it that's how you get books in your mind
faster in a way that sticks so you can
accumulate more knowledge
I know a lot of people out there if
you're new to the building your
knowledge game one of the things you're
struggling with is reading a lot but not
making progress so one of a couple
things could be true first of all if
you're reading things that don't matter
to you then odds are that it's not
sticking and so you want to make sure
that you're reading in topics where you
have a goal associated with that topic
So reading that thing really matters to
you that is one of the most important
things you can do is get a hyper amount
of clarity around what your goals are so
you know exactly what books you need to
be reading in order to bolster your
skill set so that you can move forward
most people lack the clarity and because
they lack the clarity they're not
reading they're not excited about the
things they're reading and when you're
not excited about the information that
you're in taking then forget it it's
never going to stick the next thing is
if you're not progressing I promise a
big part of this is you're not deploying
what you learn
most people are afraid of embarrassing
themselves stop immediately stop
worrying about [__] embarrassing
yourself it doesn't matter what matters
is on a long enough timeline you can be
anyone at anything if you're willing to
go and [__] up but most people are so
afraid to make mistakes they're so
afraid of looking stupid that they're
paralyzed
they're indecisive they won't move I
make mistakes all the time and it's
embarrassing and it still sucks it's not
fun but what I know is
that I will get better and people may
laugh at me in the short term but they
all give up they all give up everyone
stops everyone quits
everyone quits whenever I encounter
somebody and they are wasting time
making fun of me the one thing I know
that [__] is going to quit
because if you've got energy to waste
time making fun of somebody your
priorities are so Fubar you are trying
to self-soothe yourself from feeling
like an idiot by making fun of me
so I don't waste time on what somebody
like that thinks because I know that
skills have utility if I can re I have
this goal I have massive amounts of
clarity about what my goal is I'm
reading this thing
not because I'm going to check a box
but because I'm going to turn potential
into usable skill set which is going to
let me do something which allows me to
outperform other people but it requires
that I deploy it it requires that I use
the things that I'm learning so that I
can make them concrete my own mind so
that they become a skill rather than an
idea
don't collect ideas collect skills push
yourself figure out how you deploy all
this stuff how do I actually use this in
my real life what is it good for if it's
not good for anything you're not going
to have the energy to keep learning
about it and you're not going to make
the pro the progress that you want so
make sure I got my goal I care about
this thing I'm reading this not to check
a box I'm reading this to get good at
something and then I'm deploying it to
make sure that it sticks so that I'm
making progress and I don't care if in
the moment
I make a mistake I don't care if in the
moment I fail I don't care if in the
moment other people think I'm ridiculous
I don't care if they think I'm stupid
because I am acquiring knowledge and
knowledge stacks
you get good at this thing it allows you
to understand this thing which allows
you to understand that thing which
allows you to understand that thing and
each one of those things is minor unto
itself
but just like a Lego piece by itself is
not very interesting if you can build
virtually anything you want with Legos
but you have to be willing to take the
time to put them together and have
people look at the incomplete thing and
say that that doesn't make sense I don't
see it I don't understand what that is
that's going to take too long why are
you doing that Legos are stupid
but when Legos are knowledge
it will change your life
but you've got to be willing to deploy
it
so
don't waste time
lamenting your stupidity your
frustration at being slower than other
people it just is what it is focus all
of your time and energy I have a goal
that goal makes demands those demands
require that I get better at something
that I'm not currently good at
and I'm going to read about it and then
use it
because it is only in the using that I
will make progress
so if you do that if you follow that
formula learn in the morning use in the
afternoon not research for six months
and then try learn in the morning use in
the afternoon or learn during breakfast
and use immediately after breakfast the
faster you can begin using the things
that you're learning the faster you will
make progress and remember progress is
iterative it's not overnight you go from
nowhere to somewhere you go from one
step to the next step to The Next Step
One Foot In Front of the other and you
make these tiny little incremental bits
of progress with every new thing that
you deploy after learning but if you
don't deploy it if you don't use it one
it's not even going to stick because a
lot of these ideas are just going to go
in one ear and out the other you're
really only going to retain what hits
you emotionally and what you use and if
you wanted to hit your you emotionally
there better be a goal driving you to
read that thing when you read something
I remember one time I was on an airplane
this was the craziest [__] ever I was
reading the book Think and Grow Rich by
Napoleon Hill
and I'm going through the book and he's
talking about how uh hey there's a
secret to this book and I'm going to
give you that secret to the book
and I'm oh my God Think and Grow Rich I
want to grow Rich this is amazing I'm
broke at the time so I'm reading reading
and reading and every page is like I'm
telling you the secret I'm telling you
the secret I'm telling you the secret
and I'm like what and about I don't know
page 52 win he's like I've told you the
secret to this book on every single page
without fail and if you don't yet know
what it is you're in trouble
and I was like
what has he said on every page
and I was on an airplane
and I remember it finally dawned on me
the only thing that he had said on every
single page was if you believe you can
you can and if you believe you can't you
can't
and I was like
holy [__] I got Goosebumps all over my
body I remember I looked up and looked
around the plane because it it
transformed me as a human being you can
draw a line in the sand me before
realizing that piece of information me
after realizing that piece of
information and it felt it rocked me so
hard some weird part of my subconscious
was like surely other people just felt
that and I looked around to see if
anybody else was feeling what I was
feeling of course they weren't because I
was the only one reading the [__]
book but that's how hard it hit me
and when you have an emotional reaction
on something like that you remember it
but you've got to want that information
so badly I was so desperate at that time
to get rich that I was like oh my God I
need to understand what's going on in
this book I was desperate for that
information and when it hit me when I
learned the thing that that book was
trying to teach me it rocked me to the
degree that I remember to this day where
I was sitting what it felt like when I
realized that thing and I will never
forget the lesson if you believe you can
you can if you if you think you can you
can if you think you can't you can't
just facts so understand that you have
to have a goal there has to be a reason
in order for that thing that you're
learning to hit you emotionally and then
you're way more likely to remember it
deploy it deploy it with immediacy and
aggression don't be afraid to fail or
look stupid because no matter how dumb
you look in the moment knowledge stacks
and a long enough timeline you can beat
anyone at anything it's literally true
but it's so directionally correct you
should live your life as if
if you are on a quest to learn as much
as you can but you're having a hard time
focusing I'm going to tell you right now
that focus is a muscle and you've got to
put in the time and the energy to get
better at focusing now how do you do
that in a world where the phone and the
infinite scroll has taught you to seek a
dopamine response every three and a half
seconds this is a real thing by the way
and you do need to be very careful about
it one I would say that going on a
dopamine fast is a really good idea but
my official answer is that you need to
practice meditation the reason that you
need to practice meditation is
meditation is really just an exercise of
focusing that happens to have this
knock-on effect in calming you and all
of that but really
the nature of meditation is You're
simply returning back to the breath
you were noticing when your mind begins
to wander
and you're returning back to the breath
and so you're sitting there
and you've got your monkey mind and it's
running wild and it's chasing thought
after thought after thought
but you can once you realize that your
mind is racing you can come back to the
breath you can re-center yourself in the
here and the now and as you do that
you're going to find that the amount of
time that you're able to stay focused in
the present on your breath is going to
get longer what is up my friend Tom
bilyu here and I have a big question to
ask you how would you rate your level of
personal discipline on a scale of one to
ten if your answer is anything less than
a ten I've got something cool for you
and let me tell you right now discipline
by its very nature means compelling
yourself to do difficult things that are
stressful boring which is what kills
most people or possibly scary or even
painful now here is the thing achieving
huge goals and stretching to reach your
potential requires you to do those
challenging stressful things and to
stick with them even when it gets boring
and it will get boring building your
levels of personal discipline is not
easy but let me tell you it pays off in
fact I will tell you you're never going
to achieve anything meaningful unless
you develop discipline right I've just
released a class from Impact Theory
university called how to build Ironclad
discipline that teaches you the process
of building yourself up in this area so
that you can push yourself to do the
hard things that greatness is going to
require of you right click the link on
the screen register for this class right
now and let's get to work I will see you
inside this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until then my friends be
legendary peace out
then when you get good at that you can
start stretching that out longer and
longer you can meditate it won't be
uninterrupted by thoughts but you can
meditate for a longer period of time
with longer gaps between thoughts being
able to bring yourself more quickly back
to the breath that when you're reading
you're trying to accumulate that
knowledge that's going to serve you so
well that you're able to come back to
what you're reading and come back to
what you're reading and stay focused
because you're taking time every day to
sit yourself down and practice the art
of focusing now if you do that and you
get good at dopamine fasting so that you
don't need a dopamine hit every three
seconds all of a sudden it all works in
your favor and you're able to really do
deep work I believe that's Cal newport's
phrase
you want to do that deep work you want
to be able to get lost in something
where you're really focusing down and
then if I can add a little bit of Tom
bill you Magic on top of this I'm going
to say you need to be a hardcore
[__] you need to make demands of
yourself you need to force yourself to
focus you need to get some
Fury in your diet so that as you begin
to wander and you're on something that
you need to stay focused on you tell
yourself hey
Focus no you can't get up and go get a
drink of water no you do not need to eat
no you definitely don't need to get on
your phone and check something you're
doing this thing you have a goal your
goal is made demands you're going to
stay focused you are going to do this
thing if it [__] kills you you're
going to buckle down strap in and get it
done set a time frame I'm not going to
do anything for the next 22 minutes
whatever other than finish this thing
I'm going to get this thing done by this
time and then celebrate your victories
and punish your failures do not let
yourself off the hook if you say you're
going to do something and you don't do
it
you need to be able to punish yourself
now I'm not talking about beating
yourself into Oblivion or doing
something that diminishes your sense of
self but I am saying that when you say
you're going to do something and you
don't do it then that should sting that
should sting inside yourself inside your
own mind if you were going to allow
yourself to take a break if you got the
thing done in a certain amount of time
and you don't hit it then don't take the
break if you were going to praise
yourself internally uh for doing it and
you don't do it then you don't praise
yourself you admonish yourself you say
like that sucked that was dumb I said I
was going to do it and I didn't why
didn't I I need to get better and you
need to push yourself to improve at some
point you get the life that you accept
from yourself and you've got to have
standards and hold yourself accountable
to those standards that means you have
to know how to reward yourself it means
you have to know how to punish yourself
and that you shouldn't be spending more
time punishing yourself than rewarding
yourself
even if you're getting off the rails
beating yourself up too much becomes
corrosive becomes self-destructive but
if you don't know how to wield that
weapon well you will never be able to
push yourself as far as someone like me
that can do both
I know how to effectively reward and
punish myself and it's not some big
thing it's just internally I know I
didn't do what I said I was going to do
simple as now I will also tell my wife
hey I said I was going to do this thing
and I didn't do it and that sucks and I
hate doing that because I want her to be
impressed with me I want my friends to
be impressed with me and so I'll tell
them
do whatever it takes
but make demands of yourself
if you don't make demands of yourself
you will not achieve what you could
achieve but so many people are afraid of
feeling bad about themselves for even a
second
you have to love yourself
but you're not going to be able to love
yourself to success if you're failing
it's just real you won't have respect
for yourself if you don't do things that
you believe are worthy of success
you won't have self-worth if you don't
believe that you're doing things
that make you Worthy
it just is what it is
and so if you really want to be
successful make progress learn
you've got to hold yourself accountable
and then you've got to do the things to
build that muscle
it is a muscle you can get better at it
so never waste time worrying about where
you are if you're easy to get off track
now don't think that that's somehow a
permanent state of being recognize you
just have to get better at that thing
hold yourself to a standard push
yourself to improve do the things that
are necessary to actually turn potential
into skill set
that's the magic formula
if you have dyslexia
know that it is going to be more
difficult for you to learn some things
but that dyslexia is also bordering on a
superpower I highly encourage you to do
research on dyslexia there is an obscene
amount of entrepreneurs that are
dyslexic Richard Branson has talked
about this there's something about the
way that dyslexia organizes the mind
that allows you to connect very
interesting ideas and to problem solve
in a very unique way so yes there are
things about dyslexia that are going to
make things way harder written language
is going to be very difficult but
understanding that it also gives you a
unique way of approaching the world
which is why so many people with
dyslexia go on to be very successful now
dyslexia can be the great destroyer of
Dreams because of your dyslexic people
will often confuse you for somebody
that's dumb basically and they're going
to tell you that you're not good at
learning the reality is you're just not
good at Learning in the typical way but
doing things in typical way is around
relevant especially today so if I were
dyslexic I would be taking in all of my
information orally so I would be
listening to things but now you've got
audible you've got YouTube you've got
speechify all things that allow you to
take in information by listening so
these days dyslexia is not the
brutal thing to overcome that it used to
be it's still not easy and anything that
makes things more difficult for you is
not going to be fun but I think that in
this case frame of reference is
everything you have dyslexia so what
address it find a way to get the
information in in an auditory fashion
and then recognize there's a superpower
side to this go research it so you can
see how to put it to use in your own
life I think that that will be
incredibly effective so take a page out
of Jocko willing's book and you have
dyslexia good
good now what go do the things you need
to do to get better period end of story
don't waste a single second crying a
tear over the fact that things are
harder for you so [__] what
we all have something that sucks we all
have things that are hard
get better
address the issues
do whatever it takes to get around this
obstacle move forward with aggression
all right you ready we are going to play
a game here you and I are going to
pretend that you have 30 days to
accumulate as much knowledge as humanly
possible in order to move your life
forward here's what you're going to do
first and foremost get sleep I don't
know what it is about people I'm captain
hustle I love hustle porn hustle culture
all of it but let me tell you right now
you must optimize your cognition so
you're going to get sleep you're going
to sleep as much as you need that is
going to prime your brain to take in the
information second you're going to get
your diet right there is no way that you
can think clearly if your diet isn't
right now what that is exactly is beyond
the scope of this answer but I will tell
you that there is plenty of information
on my own channels about how to optimize
your cognition through diet go check it
out the next thing that you're going to
do exercise the crazy thing is read the
book Spark if you get somebody's heart
rate up whatever they do immediately
after that is going to be the thing that
they're able to intake the best so
whatever your hardest classes you want
to do after getting your heart rate up
so you work out get your heart rate back
down to Baseline and then that next
thing that you do you're going to be
primed to intake this information boys
and girls boy oh boy do I wish that you
didn't have to think about your body
when trying to optimize your mind
because I find the body really boring
but the reality is
that is the way it works and if you
don't recognize the need to get your
body in order
so that you can optimize your cognition
you are always going to struggle to take
in information in the most efficient way
possible this is my secret weapon
sleep
amazing diet
and working out
okay now that we've primed the body now
we can get into really in taking the
information
as always it starts with a goal you
don't want to be taking in random ass
information what are you trying to do
figure out what your goal is get a hyper
amount of clarity then we're going to
figure out what are going to be the
books that we need or again when I say
book I mean books YouTube podcasts
articles whatever
we're going to intake that information
we're going to intake it in swarms so
we're going to pick a topic or two
that really matters to us that's
dictated To Us by our goals we're going
to read in a swarm we're going to figure
out what that topic is all about once we
get the general gist which we will
Define this way first you need to figure
out what the terms are
until you understand what the terms are
you're not going to be able to go deep
even if you want on that topic because
you don't know the way to identify the
people that really understand that topic
because the 101 stuff is going to talk
really broadly if you want to get into
the deeper stuff you're going to need to
know the terms so we're going to read in
swarms we're going to figure out what
the terms are we're going to figure out
who the players are okay terms and
players now when we know the the players
being the people who are the people that
are really talking well about this we're
going to find the people that we really
resonate with and we're going to go
deeper into the world whether it's on
YouTube podcasts books whatever we're
going to go deeper we're going to start
searching by those terms as we begin to
learn them to figure out who all the
players are so high level we're going to
start with sub-optimal people just is
the way that it is they're going to
start talking in the terms that we need
then once we have the terms we're going
to start going deeper we're going to
figure out who the real experts are that
speak to us then we're going to really
drill down into those once we're
drilling down into the topic and we know
who the real people are that are me
meaningful in this space we're going to
seek disconfirming evidence do not trick
yourself
into learning a side of an argument the
whole point
of moving ourselves forward with
knowledge is to get to the point where
we can more accurately predict the
outcome of our actions because the
knowledge that we're in taking
is closer to the truth of how the world
works that's how we're going to
determine the value of information does
it actually allow us to do the thing
that we want to do more effectively yes
or no if yes keep going down that path
now the only way to get there is to seek
disconfirming evidence to make sure that
what you understand actually works the
reason that people are afraid of
disconfirming evidence is it can shake
your world view it makes you feel less
cool people learn things because they
want to feel cool that's the wrong
reason to learn things
you never
want to learn something because it makes
you feel cool
you want to learn something because it
actually makes you cool
and the way that something makes you
cool is it makes you capable of
outperforming everyone else
it's the juice man I get it we all want
to love other people we all want to hold
hands and be happy and I love that [__]
I love getting along I love teamwork but
the reality is
if you want to accomplish something
extraordinary in your life
that's about getting better than other
people
that's why it's extraordinary it's
extraordinary it's above the ordinary
it's better than that other [__] it's
not mid okay we are pushing ourselves
into rarified air boys and girls and
that is going to require us to really
figure out what is true
and what is true is defined is that
which allows me to more accurately
predict the outcome of my behaviors
because when you're really able to go if
I do this I'm going to get this result
that's how you get to success
and the way that you're able to do that
is by taking on knowledge
that is based in the way that things
really are and if you're just trying to
construct a world view that's going to
sound good on Twitter you are going to
get [__] slapped by reality
you're going to encounter the way the
world really works the way that people
really are the way that your industry
really works the way the business is
however you define success the way that
it really is
Everybody's Got A Plan until they get
punched in the face so says Mike Tyson
the punched in the face is reality
so you better have a set of skills that
allows you to get punched in the face
recompose yourself and keep going and
the only thing that is going to do that
is the thing that's the closest to the
truth and I say the closest to the truth
because it's really hard to know
objective reality
so we get as close as we can by saying
this is my goal
and then when I believe this and act
this way it moves me closer to that goal
cool now we know that we're aligned with
the way that the world actually works
and so in our 30-day challenge
we are going to be relentlessly
optimizing our cognition
reading and swarms finding out the words
the players
then going deep on those things
seeking disconfirming evidence so that
we can make sure that what we're
learning is actually real and we're
going to deploy that knowledge
relentlessly every day we're not going
to wait till the end of the 30 days
we're going to start deploying it right
away does this really work do I
understand it can I explain it to myself
can I explain it to other people
when you're able to do all of that you
will make tremendous progress and then
last but not least we're going to push
ourselves to intake that information as
fast as humanly possible
get that information in get some urgency
in your life
push yourself hold yourself to a high
standard and make sure it's in pursuit
of something you actually care about
because then this whole game is fun
and you can get out there and really do
something amazing that gets you into
that passion feedback loop where you're
able to add value to other people's
lives in a way that's really fun for you
that keeps you wanting to go harder push
yourself move faster seek that
disconfirming evidence deploy that
knowledge make sure that it's real
refine refine refine fail embarrass
yourself all in the name of getting
better
with each Lego piece of information
until finally you were so good at
something you care about
that people can't stop you no matter how
much they try
and if you spend 30 days doing that
it'll be the 30 greatest days of your
life
enjoy
all right everybody until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace
if you need some extra hacks to help
yourself focus and think critically and
strategically check out this clip where
I talk about how to enhance your
cognition
what's up everybody let's talk about one
of the most important things that you
can spend your time on brain
optimization I am joining you from the
gym which is my least favorite part of
brain optimization but it's an
absolutely critical part there are many
things that you can do to get your
cognition at the highest level possible
and I often hear people thinking that
they can grind their way to a better
performance and while working long hours
is certainly one of the strategies that
you can run to get ahead in life I will
say you have to be very careful not to
spend extra hours
in a sub-optimal cognitive State and
that's what most people do is they think
the first thing to go is sleep the
second thing to go is exercise the third
thing to go is Diet things that we're
going to be talking about today and the
reality is that the first thing you want
to do is optimize your cognition so that
all of the hours that you're spending on
your chosen Pursuit are things that are
done at the highest possible level from
a cognitive standpoint now nobody wishes
more than me that you did not need to
pay attention to the body that you could
simply live this entirely cerebral life
and get everything going that way but
the reality is that you cannot separate
the organ of the brain from the rest of
your body this all works in concert much
to my dismay so if you want to be
thinking quickly if you want to be
thinking clearly if you want to be at
your best feeling good operating at a
high level the reality is you must focus
on cognitively optimizing that's we're
going to talk about today
one of the most important things that
you can do is to get yourself in shape
now
I am not a fan of working out in fact it
is very fair to say that I really don't
enjoy working out but when I think about
getting my brain in shape one of the
most important things you can do is get
your blood pumping now I'm also not
going to lie there are cognitive
benefits psychologically if nothing else
to also being strong and looking good
none of those are going to hurt your
feelings but the real reason that I
spend my time in the gym is that you're
sending a very particular signal to your
brain when you're working out and so you
increase the production of things like
bdnf
brain derived neurotropic Factor if I
remember all the letters correctly but
basically you're sending Miracle Grow to
your brain to make sure that you're
creating the optimal neurochemical soup
that you need in order to be performing
at a high level it really has big
impacts on memory and so getting in the
gym getting your blood pumping getting
yourself in good shape is going to be a
critical part of getting rid of brain
fog making sure that you're incredibly
Sharp and making sure that you're
creating the growth factors in your
brain that you need to enhance your
memory and that's going to be a big part
of it so I personally go into the gym
roughly five times a week there are
definitely times where I might miss a
day and there's some weeks where I might
add a day but on average it comes out to
be about five times a week you can do
any kind of different split that you
like but I personally find that weights
over cardio is one it's far more
pleasurable for me and the best workout
is the one that you will actually do and
so I'm far more likely to stick with a
routine that is revolving around
weightlifting now I will often do the
weights at a cardio pace so I'm moving
very quickly in the gym from thing to
thing to thing and not a lot of rest
between periods which has a two-fold
Effect one I'm going to move quickly
through my workout so the amount of time
that I need is very low and then the
other part of that is that I'm actually
getting that card video workout my heart
is pumping it's a very intense workout
and that way it allows me to basically
combine the two things but some people
prefer to do cardio and certainly
getting yourself in cardio shape can be
very advantageous as well certainly for
heart health for your vasculature all of
that stuff is incredibly important to
maintain well diet exercise and sleep
are going to be the magic Trifecta of
the little bit of meditations right now
we're going to cover all of that but
then finding if you're going to do that
split how much can you mix it up now I
am particularly bad about mixing up my
workouts I'm just going to be really
honest but
having some sort of split so you're not
doing your full body every time is going
to be better so the way that I break it
up is for me I do a push pull legs ABS
split so it's a three day cycle that I
rotate through so I typically start with
my back and biceps so that's going to be
your pull and then I go to chest
shoulders triceps on the following day
that's going to be your push and then I
do legs and abs on a separate day and
that's the basic split that I use in my
gym I work out roughly 45 minutes
sometimes an hour sometimes I might be
able to get out a bit faster sometimes I
have to get out faster if I've got a lot
going on for the day but that is the
basic cycle put in the work you will
definitely get the results
foreign
[Music]
meditation is one of the most important
things in my life it would be very fair
to say that it changed my life that is
for sure it might it's a little bit of
an exaggeration to say that it saved my
life but I certainly saved my sanity and
I resisted doing it for a long time and
I'm very glad that I finally met Mark
Devine who told me to stop being
ridiculous and to start meditating and
it really was a game changer so managing
your neurochemistry is one of the single
most important things you can do and
understanding how to shift back and
forth between the sympathetic nervous
system and the parasympathetic nervous
system so sympathetic is the fight or
flight response so many of us that are
hard charging you're going to spend so
much of your time there and it really
does have some sort of cumulative effect
so that after a while you just feel on
edge all the time the sense of you know
something is wrong you just feel
anti-unsettled and that can get really
unbearable in your life and meditation
is a magical way that nature has given
us where you can reset that to absolute
zero to where you feel completely calm
and creative and anchored it is truly a
phenomenal gift of evolution that simply
staying in a comfortable position which
I'm literally sitting exactly how I sit
when I meditate I breathe from my
diaphragm down at your belly and that by
bringing your thoughts back only to the
breath back to your breath nice and
simply back to the breath it's going to
wander your mind is going to wander
you're not doing anything wrong when
your mind wanders that is the nature of
the human mind so don't worry that you
have what they call the monkey mind that
your mind is constantly bouncing around
to all these thoughts many of them
negative
just when you realize that your mind is
wandered come back to the breath now I
use headphones when I meditate and I
play the sounds of nature typically my
favorite is a thunderstorm there's
something about hearing the rain and the
occasional crack of thunder that just
keeps bringing me back to the present
moment right there with the sound of
that rain the sound of that Thunder the
rhythm of my breath and then I find when
I maximize the pleasure of each part of
the breath Cycles there are four parts
to the breath cycle there's the inhale
the inhale hold at the top
the exhale
and the exhale hold at the bottom and
then you just repeat that cycle over and
over and I'll do a couple Cycles here so
you can see now oftentimes people will
talk about making each part of the
breath cycle four equal parts I have
found that
optimizing for the pleasure of each part
of the breast cycle is a far more useful
way for me everybody needs to try for
themselves but a far more useful way for
me to get what I call that background
radiation that anxiety that stress all
of that down to zero and so this is what
it looks like for me I sit cross-legged
just because I find it comfortable you
don't need to whatever's comfortable for
you I put my hands in my lap I have
found there's something weird about
touching my hands together ever so
lightly that I don't know if it creates
like a circle of energy I don't know it
sounds cheesy but that's how it feels
and then I close my eyes and again I
would normally have my headphones over
my ears listening to the sound of a
thunderstorm and then I just start my
breath I breathe in through my nose and
out through my mouth but whatever feels
right for you so this is what it looks
like for me
foreign
can't help but be relaxed uh doing that
even just right now here on camera and
the key thing is you'll notice that for
me I hold at the top of the inhale for a
very brief period of time but then I
hold the exhale for a much longer period
of time and the only reason that I do
that is that it feels better and so
finding that Rhythm for you is going to
be the key and then I meditate for the
exact amount of time that it takes me to
get completely calm and creative so that
I have no background radiation no sense
of stress no sense of anxiety sometimes
it takes two minutes sometimes it takes
45 minutes now it's never taken me
longer than 45 minutes even at the most
stressed out and anxious I've ever been
in my life which is extraordinarily
stressed uh it's never taken me more
than 45 minutes to get to cleat
equanimity and
that is worth its weight in gold now my
wife does not enjoy meditating but she
does enjoy drawing where she gets into a
very meditative State now I think that
if she let herself off the hook and stop
thinking that there's ever going to be a
time where her mind doesn't wander off
onto things and just realize that's part
of it and you just come back to the
breath and you're going to get better at
it over time that you would get
additional benefit from traditional
meditation but
having something anything in your life
that's meditative maybe it's the gym
maybe it's drawing maybe it's cooking
whatever your thing is finding something
that makes you feel absolutely calm and
creative find that thing at a biological
level it's going to help you and few
things will help you optimize your
cognition better the meditation so
develop that practice I promise you'll
reap the rewards
all right welcome to where the bottle is
won or lost now all of the things that
we're talking about today are important
for cognitively optimizing but very few
will have the deleterious effect of
failing to get your diet right as
somebody who went through a brief period
where I could not understand what was
going on I had brain fog I was tired it
literally felt like I had lost my will
to fight it was crazy it was the
weirdest period of my life as it relates
to diet that is for sure and the culprit
ended up being pecans I still can't
believe that that is true but I know
that if you're not feeling good in life
at a physiological level the first thing
you should do is ask what am I eating a
lot of and then cut that out it is
shocking how much your diet impacts your
cognition so now what I'm showing you is
basically everything that I eat now full
disclosure if I make any error in my
life it is that I don't eat a wide
enough variety of foods but I'm going to
be honest with you about what I eat so
this is my Monday through Friday diet in
its entirety with the exception of
jicama I don't have any jicama but I do
eat a fair amount of that all right so
the vast majority of my calories
um so I eat a lot of meat and the vast
majority of my calories this is a
sponsor but they're a sponsor because
it's real so Lisa and I
um in trying to fix her gut needed a
good source of grass fed and
grass-finished meats so we get our Meats
almost exclusively from butcherbox again
they're a sponsor but that is not why I
eat them uh I eat a lot of eggs so
intake calories
um a fair amount from eggs and then
between the different meat sources that
we get I have found that consuming a lot
of vegetable matter does not sit well
with meat I'm perfectly willing to
accept that if I were to transition my
microbiome slowly over time that it may
work but I have not found that
advantageous but I do eat a fair amount
of green leafy vegetables three of my
favorites right here you've got bok choy
you've got kale and collard greens are
ones that I particularly enjoy I also
eat a lot of carrots and then for a
snack I'll have berries so it's
something very sweet almost always
either blueberries raspberries sometimes
blackberries but those are the ones that
I eat
olive oil extra virgin olive oil is the
um the only oil that I use so be very
very thoughtful about getting vegetable
oil so
vegetable oils a they rancify even just
sitting on the shelf and then they have
a very low flash point or smoke point so
you can damage the fats in cooking I use
olive oil largely because it has a high
smoke point so it doesn't tend to get
damaged in a normal cooking process of
course if you cook it too high or too
long it can
um and I probably get about I don't know
60 to 65 of my calories
um from meats and
if you throw in the eggs maybe it goes
closer to 70 75 of my calories
um and that's all that I eat Monday
through Friday now on the weekends I eat
differently so on the weekends I have a
fair amount of sushi uh but it's mostly
what I'll call clean sushi so it's
things like baked crab hand rolls so
it's basically crab rice and avocado
um and that helps me mix things up I'll
also get some of the things you see here
or maybe like a beef burger I don't eat
the bun or anything like that it's
literally just the Patty which I tend to
mix with eggs or bacon and
yeah that's my diet now in terms of what
I drink I'm not sponsored by these guys
uh just so happens that I mix
cold brewed coffee because I don't like
hot liquids
and again no sponsorship or anything but
I drink Perrier water and I mix them
together and that's very weird for
people but I don't like the idea of
being addicted to caffeine so I like to
keep my caffeine intake very very low so
what I do is I take one of these and I
normally have an empty one and I'll pour
some from the full one into the empty
one so that I get about a third of the
coffee that I mix with the water and I
continue every drink that I take I add
more water until it reaches a point
where I can sort of just barely taste
the coffee and the only reason I do that
is that when you don't drink anything
other than water it gets a little bit
tedious so one I like the sparkling
water and two I like to mix it with the
coffee just to get a little bit of a
different flavor and the reason that I
chose coffee is I didn't want to drink
anything that humans haven't been
drinking for thousands of years that was
the idea and that actually made a big
difference in my anxiety levels once I
cut out all of my
um
artificially sweetened beverages so I
was drinking a lot of zero calorie
monster and a lot of Diet Coke and I
missed them and they're amazing and to
anybody that drinks them I get it but I
had begun to notice a tie between having
that and feeling anxious and so I
decided to cut it out and just see if it
would help and it helped massively I'll
say it probably reduced my anxiety by
about 70 percent which is massive so um
that's been a big win so
this is it now on the weekends on a
Saturday I may have a full-blown cheat
meal I don't do it every weekend but I
absolutely do it when I'm in the mood it
tends to be something like Cold Stone
ice cream which I absolutely love
um so I'm very thoughtful about how
often I do that very thoughtful about
monitoring my blood glucose levels uh in
fact literally just off camera is a new
blood glucose monitor that I'm excited
to try out a continuous glucose monitor
and I think it's really important to
understand what your average glucose
level is like where are you spending the
most of your time and then another big
part of my strategy is intermittent
fasting and so I will intermittent fast
seven days a week there literally isn't
a day even during the Christmas season
where I am totally off the chain in
terms of my normal diet even then I'll
do intermittent fasting and I do that
one for cognition it is hugely valuable
to staying sharp to have these long
periods of time without eating and then
usually one to two times a year I'll do
an extended fast and some of them might
only be 24 hours other times it might be
up to 72 hours I've done a full five day
fast before that was miserable though
and I don't plan to be repeating that
unless some new evidence comes out that
really shows that there's a huge
difference between the 72-hour fast and
a five-day fast I just found that it was
like having the flu I couldn't pay
attention it was just horrible and I'm
somebody who's keto adapted so for me to
really struggle at the five days like it
it negatively impacted my business which
is something that I don't like to do and
certainly had a negative impact on my
cognition I find a 24-hour fast it's
pretty amazing longer than that and I do
find that it has negative impact on my
performance so I do limit that but every
day literally every day my average is
probably about 17.5 hours so that means
there are some days that I'm doing call
it 19 hours and then other days in the
weekend uh we're all due typically 16
ish hours but in the wash it comes out
to about 17.5 when you factor it over
the course of a year but that
intermittent fasting is something that I
do all the time every day it's just a
natural part of my life and the way that
I do that is I have my last meal around
1 15 2 p.m at the latest and then I
don't eat again until the following
morning and then I'll usually eat
somewhere between eight and nine
sometimes a little earlier sometimes a
little bit later
depending on what I'm doing that day but
making sure that I get that average of
17.5 hours has been incredibly
beneficial so there's all kinds of
health benefits but in terms of its
impact on body composition and cognition
it really can't be beat especially when
your diet consists of whole food and
that's the thing other than the olive
oil everything that you see here on this
table
is the thing that you would see out and
about so the bacon looks like the Flesh
of a pig as it is and the eggs obviously
are just whole eggs the carrots carrots
the berries berries the vegetable
vegetables and so not eating processed
food eating Whole Food where during the
week I'm going to guess 95 of my
calories even including a week where I
cheat
92 to 95 of my calories are going to
come from Whole Food and that's that's
been a huge win in terms of how I feel
how I sleep
cognition all of it is vastly improved
by whole food so that's my easy advice
to people is to eat whole food whenever
possible and that's my diet
all right let's talk about the Big Daddy
of all things related to cognitive
optimization and that is sleep if I were
going to say the two most important
things that you can do to optimize your
cognition is sleep and eat right those
are the big ones but sleep is the one
that will impact you the fastest you
could mess up your diet for a day two
days maybe even a week before it really
starts to hammer you but man you miss
one night's sleep and there is a
catastrophic Cascade of biological
problems that will present themselves
rapidly so somebody that gets I think
less than six hours of sleep a night
shows the same kind of blood glucose
response as somebody who's pre-diabetic
so that gives you an idea of missing
only part of one night's sleep can have
that kind of massive cellular impact so
being incredibly thoughtful about
getting your sleep is super important
now as somebody who loves hustle porn
and being hardcore and more working an
amazing amount
I do all of that with precious little
negative impact to my sleep I won't say
that it never happens especially not
since I've gotten into nfts it is there
has been some wobble in my perfect sleep
record but it's really minor and the
reason that I do that is to me being
tired is a unique ring of hell I do not
understand people who are prepared to go
their entire lives fatigued it makes
everything worse your ability to enjoy
your life goes down you're likely to
being depressed goes way up your
likelihood of having metabolic
disturbances goes way up there there's
just so many things go wrong and then of
course the most traumatically impacted
is your ability to think clearly and
think quickly if you've ever gone even
one night with bad sleep let alone two
or three nights you can feel yourself
declining rapidly in performance in fact
if you take somebody that hasn't gotten
any sleep and put them in a car they
have the same sort of delays that
somebody who's intoxicated has so the
impacts on cognition cannot be
overstated so
be very careful if you're trying to be
at your best and really perform at an
elite level the thing that you must do
is get sleep so make sure that you're
prioritizing your sleep now how do we do
that how do we get sleep done in a high
quality way number one is you want to
make sure that you're sleeping in a
completely dark environment so no Night
Lights hopefully no even like charging
lights or things like that now one way I
do to make myself absolutely bulletproof
not only do I have blackout curtains but
I sleep with the blankets completely
over my head now admittedly it didn't
start for reasons of light pollution but
now as I get older I'm actually grateful
that my whole life I've had this pattern
of sleeping with the blankets up over my
head which I know for some people is a
just nightmare scenario but for me it's
like I mean if I'm honest it's like
sleeping in a womb it's just to be
completely encased is so wonderful and
it makes me feel so relaxed absolutely
incredible uh and then the other thing
that I do is I use white noise and so to
make sure that there are no little
noises that are going to wake me up in
the middle of the night I have white
noise basically sounds like a fan
um but from a little machine that plays
that consistent sound and that helps me
sleep incredibly well and then because
my mind is so frequently in problem
solving mode what I've found is that
about 30 minutes before I go to bed I
switch into narrative mode and so I'm
gonna be reading a book I use Audible
but I'm going to be listening to a book
that shifts my mind out of problem
solving mode into narrative mode and
then if I wake up in the middle of the
night I keep next to me three pairs of
iPod Pros so that I can put them in I
listen to the book it makes sure that I
don't go into problem solving mode that
I can can stay there in narrative mode
and I turn the volume down just to the
point where a little bit of pressure on
my ear is required to hear them
perfectly and so I'll put that bit of
pressure listen to the story and then as
I fall asleep that pressure comes off my
ear and now I can barely hear it and I
fall right back to sleep now I will give
you the advanced tip which is don't pick
an audiobook that has a bunch of murder
in it because then you wake up to the
narrator screaming and yelling and that
was waking me up so I had to learn the
hard way that there's a certain type of
book that's a good engaging story but
doesn't have narration where you know
there's yelling and screaming at any
point in the story and yeah the last
thing that I will say about my sleep is
that I go to bed at the same time every
night which is 9 p.m I treat it like a
religion I go to bed every night at that
time sometimes a few minutes earlier if
I can convince Lisa
and then the second part of that is that
I don't set an alarm so I haven't set an
alarm for the last 16 17 years at this
point so trust me you can do amazing
incredible things in your life without
needing to set an alarm I get as much
sleep as I need now I don't have kids so
that is no doubt a big part of how I'm
able to maintain that but the more that
if you do have kids you can sleep closer
to their sleep rhythms to make sure that
you're getting as much sleep as you need
and let me tell you if I had kids and I
needed to go to bed at 7 pm I would go
to bed at 7 pm so I'm gonna go to bed at
whatever time I need to in order to get
all the sleep that I need if you need
nine hours get nine hours your brain
shrinks in the middle of the night which
basically the inflammation is going down
so that the glial system can flush
everything out get rid of any toxins
that might be building up in the system
get rid of the amyloid plaques which are
very present in people that have
Alzheimer's probably doesn't cause
Alzheimer's but nonetheless lets you
know that it's doing some something that
we don't necessarily want sticking
around and I said the glial system and I
think I mean the lymphatic system
somebody will have to fact check me on
that because I'm actually not sure which
but the brain shrinks nonetheless and
allows you to clear out that system so
being very thoughtful to get as much
sleep as you need so that you can enjoy
your life
so that on a biological cellular level
that you're able to run all your
processes so that you're able to do all
the memory consolidation all the things
that go along with the ancillary effects
to sleeping and then making sure that
you're able to think
as clearly sharply and quickly as
possible and all of those things come
down to the quality of your sleep
the quality of your diet
the quality of your exercise and your
ability to manage your psychological
life which we can do most easily through
meditation
so
that in a bundle my friends is how you
take care of yourself cognitively to
make sure that you can deliver an elite
level of performance day after day week
after week month after month year after
year if you need more help putting
together an action plan on how to
improve yourself and your life check out
this episode where I detail one of the
first major steps stopping
procrastination and kicking laziness out
all together if you're not going in the
right direction in your life and you
want an action plan that you can use
goes like this